Feat: Deprecate markdown API documentation (#6836)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway/admin-api/index_latest.md

---
title: Kong Gateway Admin API
no_version: true
---

<!-- vale off -->

{{site.base_gateway}} comes with an **internal** RESTful Admin API for administration purposes.
 Requests to the Admin API can be sent to any node in the cluster, and Kong will
 keep the configuration consistent across all nodes.

 - `8001` is the default port on which the Admin API listens.
 - `8444` is the default port for HTTPS traffic to the Admin API.

 This API is designed for internal use and provides full control over Kong, so
 care should be taken when setting up Kong environments to avoid undue public

>  exposure of this API. See [this document][secure-admin-api] for a discussion
>  of methods to secure the Admin API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 exposure of this API. See [Securing the Admin API](/gateway/{{page.release}}/production/running-kong/secure-admin-api/)
 for more information about security methods.
```

> ### Documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Documentation
```

| Spec | Insomnia link |
|-------|---------------|
| [Enterprise beta API spec](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/) |<a href="https://insomnia.rest/run/?label=Kong%20Gateway%20Enterprise%203.4&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FKong%2Fdocs.konghq.com%2Fmain%2Fapi-specs%2FGateway-EE%2F3.4%2Fkong-ee-3.4.json" target="_blank"><img src="https://insomnia.rest/images/run.svg" alt="Run in Insomnia"></a>  |
|  [Open source beta API spec](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/) |  <a href="https://insomnia.rest/run/?label=Kong%20Gateway%20Open%20Source%203.4&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FKong%2Fdocs.konghq.com%2Fmain%2Fapi-specs%2FGateway-OSS%2F3.4%2Fkong-oss-3.4.json" target="_blank"><img src="https://insomnia.rest/images/run.svg" alt="Run in Insomnia"></a>|

> |        |   Endpoints        | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Endpoints | | |
```
Moving the label to the first column. In context with the specs table above it, it looks odd to have the text centered:
![Screenshot 2024-01-31 at 3 19 18 PM](https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/assets/54370747/e2652b32-c116-478a-b463-d1b971ff60a9)

Vs aligned to the left on both:
![Screenshot 2024-01-31 at 3 19 11 PM](https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/assets/54370747/4cdbf71a-9ba4-45f9-a454-3c5ac8244e35)

> | Spec | Insomnia link |
> |-------|---------------|
> | [Enterprise beta API spec](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/) |<a href="https://insomnia.rest/run/?label=Kong%20Gateway%20Enterprise%203.4&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FKong%2Fdocs.konghq.com%2Fmain%2Fapi-specs%2FGateway-EE%2F3.4%2Fkong-ee-3.4.json" target="_blank"><img src="https://insomnia.rest/images/run.svg" alt="Run in Insomnia"></a>  |
> |  [Open source beta API spec](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/) |  <a href="https://insomnia.rest/run/?label=Kong%20Gateway%20Open%20Source%203.4&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FKong%2Fdocs.konghq.com%2Fmain%2Fapi-specs%2FGateway-OSS%2F3.4%2Fkong-oss-3.4.json" target="_blank"><img src="https://insomnia.rest/images/run.svg" alt="Run in Insomnia"></a>|
> 
> 
> |        |   Endpoints        | |
> | ------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | ----- | 
> | [Information Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Information/get-endpoints) | [Health Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Information/get-status) | [Tags](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/tags/get-tags) |
> | [Debug Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/debug/put-debug-cluster-control-planes-nodes-log-level-log_level) | [Services](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Services/list-service) | [Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Routes/list-route) |
> | [Consumers](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Consumers/list-consumer) | [Plugins](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Plugins/list-plugins-with-consumer) | [Certificates](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Certificates/list-certificate) |
> | [CA Certificates](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/CA%20Certificates/list-ca_certificate) | [SNIs](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/SNIs/list-sni-with-certificate) | [Upstreams](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Upstreams/list-upstream) |
> | [Targets](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Targets/list-target-with-upstream) | [Vaults](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Vaults/list-vault) | [Keys](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Keys/list-key) |
> | [Filter Chains](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/filter-chains/get-filter-chains) | [Licenses](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/licenses/get-licenses) | [Workspaces](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Workspaces/list-workspace) |
> | [RBAC](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/rbac/get-rbac-users) | [Admins](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/admins/get-admins) | [Consumer Groups](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/consumer_groups/) |
> | [Event Hooks](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Event-hooks/get-event-hooks) | [Keyring and Data Encryption](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Keyring/get-keyring) | [Audit Logs](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/audit-logs/get-audit-requests) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kong Admin API is documented in OpenAPI format:

| Spec | Insomnia link |
|-------|---------------|
| [Enterprise beta API spec](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/) |<a href="https://insomnia.rest/run/?label=Kong%20Gateway%20Enterprise%203.4&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FKong%2Fdocs.konghq.com%2Fmain%2Fapi-specs%2FGateway-EE%2F3.4%2Fkong-ee-3.4.json" target="_blank"><img src="https://insomnia.rest/images/run.svg" alt="Run in Insomnia"></a>  |
|  [Open source beta API spec](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/) |  <a href="https://insomnia.rest/run/?label=Kong%20Gateway%20Open%20Source%203.4&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FKong%2Fdocs.konghq.com%2Fmain%2Fapi-specs%2FGateway-OSS%2F3.4%2Fkong-oss-3.4.json" target="_blank"><img src="https://insomnia.rest/images/run.svg" alt="Run in Insomnia"></a>|

See the following links for individual entity documentation:

{% navtabs %}
{% navtab Enterprise endpoints %}

| Endpoints    |           | |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | ----- | 
| [Information Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Information/get-endpoints) | [Health Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Information/get-status) | [Tags](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/tags/get-tags) |
| [Debug Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/debug/put-debug-cluster-control-planes-nodes-log-level-log_level) | [Services](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Services/list-service) | [Routes](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Routes/list-route) |
| [Consumers](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Consumers/list-consumer) | [Plugins](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Plugins/list-plugins-with-consumer) | [Certificates](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Certificates/list-certificate) |
| [CA Certificates](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/CA%20Certificates/list-ca_certificate) | [SNIs](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/SNIs/list-sni-with-certificate) | [Upstreams](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Upstreams/list-upstream) |
| [Targets](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Targets/list-target-with-upstream) | [Vaults](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Vaults/list-vault) | [Keys](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Keys/list-key) |
| [Filter Chains](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/filter-chains/get-filter-chains) | [Licenses](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/licenses/get-licenses) | [Workspaces](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Workspaces/list-workspace) |
| [RBAC](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/rbac/get-rbac-users) | [Admins](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/admins/get-admins) | [Consumer Groups](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/consumer_groups/) |
| [Event Hooks](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Event-hooks/get-event-hooks) | [Keyring and Data Encryption](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/Keyring/get-keyring) | [Audit Logs](/gateway/api/admin-ee/latest/#/audit-logs/get-audit-requests) |
{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab OSS endpoints %}
| Endpoints    |           | |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | ----- | 
| [Information Routes](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Information/get-endpoints) | [Health Routes](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Information/get-status) | [Tags](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/tags/get-tags) |
| [Debug Routes](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/debug/put-debug-cluster-control-planes-nodes-log-level-log_level) | [Services](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Services/list-service) | [Routes](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Routes/list-route) |
| [Consumers](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Consumers/list-consumer) | [Plugins](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Plugins/list-plugins-with-consumer) | [Certificates](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Certificates/list-certificate) |
| [CA Certificates](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/CA%20Certificates/list-ca_certificate) | [SNIs](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/SNIs/list-sni-with-certificate) | [Upstreams](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Upstreams/list-upstream) |
| [Targets](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Targets/list-target-with-upstream) | [Vaults](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Vaults/list-vault) | [Keys](/gateway/api/admin-oss/latest/#/Keys/list-key) |
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}
```
A few things happening here:

* Intro sentences for each table.
* We still need links to the OSS doc. How about tabs like this?
* Moving the `Endpoints` label to the first column to align the table. In context with the specs table above it, it looks odd to have the text centered:
![Screenshot 2024-01-31 at 3 19 18 PM](https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/assets/54370747/72640993-5b09-4f2a-8cc9-14be0a21d001)

Vs aligned to the left on both:
![Screenshot 2024-01-31 at 3 19 11 PM](https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/assets/54370747/cc2bb025-f249-4d94-8274-dd0a9de59b2f)

Reviewer: or, one more option: if we're adding tabs that already say "endpoints", how about removing the table header entirely: 
![Screenshot 2024-01-31 at 3 46 58 PM](https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/assets/54370747/cfeb8b04-8773-4f76-80ff-c4992c8fb104)

> ### DB-less Mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## DB-less mode
```

> In [DB-less mode](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/production/deployment-topologies/db-less-and-declarative-config/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [DB-less mode](/gateway/{{page.release}}/production/deployment-topologies/db-less-and-declarative-config/),
```

the Admin API can be used to load a new declarative
configuration, and for inspecting the current configuration. In DB-less mode,
the Admin API for each Kong node functions independently, reflecting the memory state
of that particular Kong node. This is the case because there is no database
coordination between Kong nodes.

In DB-less mode, you configure {{site.base_gateway}} declaratively.
Therefore, the Admin API is mostly read-only. The only tasks it can perform are all
related to handling the declarative config, including:

* [Validating configurations against schemas](#validate-a-configuration-against-a-schema)
* [Validating plugin configurations against schemas](#validate-a-plugin-configuration-against-the-schema)
* [Reloading the declarative configuration](#reload-declarative-configuration)
* [Setting a target's health status in the load balancer](#set-target-as-healthy)

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Supported Content Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supported content types
```

The Admin API accepts 3 content types on every endpoint:

> - **application/json**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### application/json
```

> Handy for complex bodies (ex: complex plugin configuration), in that case simply send

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `application/json` content type is useful for complex bodies (for example, complex plugin configuration).
```

> a JSON representation of the data you want to send. Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Send a JSON representation of the data you want to send. For example:
```

```json
{
    "config": {
        "limit": 10,
        "period": "seconds"
    }
}
```

> An example adding a Route to a Service named `test-service`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example of adding a route to a service named `test-service`:
```

```
curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/services/test-service/routes \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{"name": "test-route", "paths": [ "/path/one", "/path/two" ]}'
```

> - **application/x-www-form-urlencoded**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### application/x-www-form-urlencoded
```

> Simple enough for basic request bodies, you will probably use it most of the time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The content type `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` is useful for basic request bodies. 
You can use it in most situations.
```

Note that when sending nested values, Kong expects nested objects to be referenced
with dotted keys. Example:

```
config.limit=10&config.period=seconds
```

When specifying arrays, send the values in order, or use square brackets (numbering
inside the brackets is optional but if provided it must be 1-indexed, and

> consecutive). An example Route added to a Service named `test-service`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consecutive). 

Here's an example route added to a service named `test-service`:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/services/test-service/routes \
     -d "name=test-route" \
     -d "paths[1]=/path/one" \
     -d "paths[2]=/path/two"
```

The following two examples are identical to the one above, but less explicit:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/services/test-service/routes \
     -d "name=test-route" \
     -d "paths[]=/path/one" \
     -d "paths[]=/path/two"

curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/services/test-service/routes \
    -d "name=test-route" \
    -d "paths=/path/one" \
    -d "paths=/path/two"
```

> - **multipart/form-data**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### multipart/form-data
```

> Similar to URL-encoded, this content type uses dotted keys to reference nested

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `multipart/form-data` content type is similar to URL-encoded. This content type uses dotted keys to reference nested
```

objects. Here is an example of sending a Lua file to the pre-function Kong plugin:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/services/plugin-testing/plugins \
     -F "name=pre-function" \
     -F "config.access=@custom-auth.lua"
```

When specifying arrays for this content-type, the array indices must be specified.

> An example Route added to a Service named `test-service`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, here's a route added to a service named `test-service`:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```
